>> Start in a comfortable
position, spine straight.
Don't be rigid but
don't be too relaxed.
Don't slump.
Bring your attention
to the natural breath,
focused on the breath
going through the nose.
You want to be
relaxed yet alert.
Make an intention to
stay in that position.
Experience the breath as it is.
You might be able to hear
subtle breathing sounds.
Listen for any subtle
sound of the breath.
When you are
breathing in, notice
that you're breathing in.
When you're
breathing out, notice
that you're breathing out.
Notice if you're
controlling or contracting
the breath in any way.
When your mind becomes
aware of the breath,
its tendency is to control it.
Allow it to move by itself.
Don't take a breath.
Let the body take the breath.
It's like waiting for waves
to arise on the ocean.
Wait for the wave to
arise and pass away.
Notice when the air's going
in, when it's going out.
In this meditation,
we're going to go deeper
into the sensations
within the nose area.
There may be obvious sensations,
gross, physical sensations,
but we want to observe
the subtle as well.
The longer you can stay
in contact with the breath
uninterrupted, the
more subtle sensations
you'll be able to observe.
Let the sensations
change freely,
tracking them moment by moment.
Don't miss any
aspect or quality.
Here I mean any pattern
associated with the breath.
The breath might be deep
or it might be shallow.
There might be a large volume
of air or a small volume.
There could be
tingling in the nose.
There could be heat or maybe
coolness, itching, pulsation.
The air going in might be
cooler than the air going out
or maybe there's more air
going through one nostril
than the other.
Feel the pulsation
of the breath,
the pattern of the breath
occurring through time.
Notice if that pattern
is changing through time,
but be careful not to control.
Don't assume that you know what
the next breath will be like.
Let your mind be a beginner's
mind, a curious mind,
a not knowing mind,
but an interested mind.
Don't look for anything special.
Let yourself come to stillness.
We can't do anything
to come to stillness,
because doing is movement.
Just be.
Just observe the breath
that is happening.
We are observing raw
sensation, waves, or vibration,
flowing, expanding, contracting.
What we call energy or prana
is not something esoteric.
It is a subtle sensation
arising and passing away.
It is sensation changing.
Rather than being interested
in particular sensations,
we want to observe the
pattern of change itself.
Subtle sensations and
patterns of change
are important to take us from
the gross, physical, particular
world to the subtle wave-like
world or the world of energy.
Be OK with what is.
Surrender to what is,
but be aware of what is.
This is equanimity,
having no preference
of one sensation over another,
no preference about anything
that is happening.
Attention and equanimity are
the two fundamental aspects
of practice, always
being present and always
surrendering, not judging,
not reacting, not trying
to escape from this
moment, showing up fully
in this moment, letting all
sensations arise and pass away,
not doing but simply being.
Being with the
breath intimately.
The longer you sit in
presence without moving,
without reacting, more
intense sensations may arise,
and the deeper your
surrender must be,
and the more equanimity
will be cultivated,
and the deeper the purification.
[GONG RINGING]